---
title: London
type: page
class: splash
image: /headers/15.jpeg
weight: 25
---

Having docked in Tilbury early in the day, Mozoomdar took a train to
Freechurch Street (now Fenchurch Street Station) and then spent the next
hour or so ambling by carriage to Highgate Hill, home of his longtime
friend Reverend Robert Spears. {{< q-figure id="11" class="is-pulled-right" label="true" >}}
 The Unitarian preacher had hosted
Mozoomdar during his visit in 1874, but moved to London's northern
suburbs in 1885 to found a girl's school and a Unitarian
church.[^37] PCM described the streets he saw on his way to Highgate as
a scene of urban industry populated by shopkeepers, the cries of
newspaper boys, and crowds of businessmen, on the one hand, and
omnibuses, horse-drawn carriages, and tram cars "resplendent in painted
advertisements from foot-board to coachbox," on the other hand.[^38]

Mozoomdar shared in this spirit of industry. He preached at Spears'
Unitarian church for Sunday-Monday services, and although morning
attendance was thin, his evening mass drew a crowd.[^39] In addition, he
gave an interview to the Reuter's Agency, later reproduced in many of
the daily and weekly papers, about the Bombay riots that took place from
11-14 August.[^40] Mozoomdar identified three causes of the riots:

> (1) the agitation against cowkilling, (2) the belief among the
Mohammedan community of Bombay that the sympathies of the Government are
with them as against the Hindoos, and (3) the mixed and lawless
character of the Mohammedan populace in Bombay.[^41]

Though his characterization of Bombay Muslims may seem at odds with his
aspirations for religious confraternity, PCM\'s perception of Islam as
inherently violent did not prevent him from finding value in it. For
example, in a Chicago lecture given three weeks later, Mozoomdar would
maintain that Islam, "with fire and sword, proves the almightiness of God's will."[^42]

[^37]: Alan Ruston, "Robert Spears -- the Unitarian Dynamo,"
    *Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society* 22, no.1 (1999):
    64.

[^38]: Mozoomdar, "On the Way to Chicago," 48-49.

[^39]: Ibid.

[^40]: These riots were ostensibly caused by Hindu-Muslim disputes over
    cow-slaughter, and came to be represented as one episode in a series
    of outbursts of communal violence leading up to Indian Independence.
    See Jim Masselos, "The City as Represented in Crowd Action: Bombay
    1893," *Economic and Political Weekly* 28, no.5 (1993): 185.

[^41]: "An Indian Pundit on the Bombay Riots," *The Nottingham Evening
    Post*, August 22, 1893, 4.

[^42]: Mozoomdar, *Lectures in America*, 12.
